[Music]
robert greene welcome back to the show
thanks for having me tom sure i am super
excited i love your work beyond all
reason and measure i have loved
everything of yours that i've ever read
what i like about
the approach that you take is you and i
are obsessed with a very similar idea
which i think is critically important
for people to understand which is deal
with the world the way that it actually
is and not the way that you wish it were
and i think there are a few people that
are able to look unflinchingly at both
sides of the human experience the
sublime which you're getting into in
your new book which you certainly touch
on in this one
and then
the dark side the you know the power
struggles and all of that um
help us understand
what the world is really like what what
do you think is that key thing that
people misunderstand
well the key thing is it goes back to
our nature and how we evolved as as
conscious animals
the key thing is there's an animal part
of our nature which is we completely
take appearances for reality that's sort
of the source of our problems and our
misery to be honest with you in life
so
the front that people present
the way they look the way they talk to
us their words
we sort of take at face value
and although we might think or we might
know from reading a book or whatever
that you can't always trust appearances
is kind of a cliche we can't control
ourselves
so it makes us extremely vulnerable to
charming people to charlatans to con
artists to politicians who say one thing
who do another to relationships terrible
relationships where we fall in love with
exactly the wrong person to the worst
kind of hires you know i do a lot of
consulting work i've been doing it for
over 20 years now the number one problem
i deal with is i hired the worst person
in the world and they're making my life
hell
right and why did you hire the wrong
person because you judge them on their
charming smiles their appearance their
their smooth talk their resume which you
can conceal a lot with your resume you
didn't look behind the facade and look
at what's underneath the character so
this is kind of ingrained in our nature
it goes back thousands and thousands of
years it's extremely difficult to
overcome right and i have the problem
too i deal with it all the time
and and i have to go through a process
where i i step back and i say
i don't want to be paranoid
but this person is so nice and pleasant
is there something else going on behind
behind the curtain that that's there
you know and then sometimes i tell
myself no
i have ways of judging that they're that
they're cons there's a consistency
between the face and the reality
but oftentimes there is not and i've
become very good at that kind of
[__] detect detection which i've
been doing my whole life how do you get
good at that well
you know some things are hard to put
into words which is why i struggle so
dif much with my books
because a lot of human communication
i estimated 95 it's just a number is
non-verbal right
so we don't pay much attention to that
because we're so word oriented right
we're so embedded in language that we
think everything in terms of what people
say
but unconsciously without even realizing
it we're continually judging people on
their non-verbal behavior
right so
there's their eyes their smile
are different from what they actually
say but we're not really
so in kind of a pre
naturally intuitive way we understand
that we don't trust those kind of
judgments right so we we rely more on
what they say than what the signals that
we pick up from their body language
so years and years of training and being
sensitive to it it's probably something
that has to go back to my child that if
you put me on a couch and psychoanalyze
me right here there was probably
something in my childhood where i had to
learn how to really read people not by
what they said by but
everything about them and i have kind of
a feel an intuitive feel for the energy
the vibrations the mood that people give
off not through what they say but
through their body through particularly
their tone of voice and all the other
signals
that is a number that is the main way of
judging you know what's going what's
really going on the other thing you look
at are people's patterns of behavior
right things that have happened in the
past as i said in laws of human nature
nobody ever does one something just once
right if somebody [__] up and does
something kind of hurts you in some way
and they say oh i'm sorry i don't know
what came over me that that's not me
don't trust that it'll happen again for
sure it will happen again a second or
third fourth time what do you think is
going on there because when you were
going through the list of things being
in a bad relationship was the one that
really jumped out of you know you hear
people ending in these just like
horrendous cycles of being stuck in this
abusive relationship and the person
manages to reel them back in
what is going on on the side of the
person who convinces themselves
to
go back into that relationship is there
the need to be loved is there a wound or
something that you're that they're
trying to deal with and how do you
advise people that are stuck in a loop
like that well it's probably from some
kind of primal wound
right so there's a perverse part of
human nature which is
oftentimes in early childhood
something happened to us often something
that didn't happen to us like the love
we didn't get or the feel the nurturing
that we didn't get there's this kind of
wound this emptiness this lack right
and we grow up and we're not really
aware of it and kind of things grow over
this wound but what also happens which
is the perverse side of human nature
is that
early on our kind of sexual excitement
is sort of kind of grows up around that
wound
so that is so weird and yet seems so
self-evidently true yeah but
why
well i i'd have to be like i'd have to
go into something you know hit my go
inside my own psychoanalytic
you know mindset here but
um
you know when you're when you're very
young you're extremely vulnerable you're
extremely open to the energies of other
people in ways we don't understand right
now right it's it's it's hard to imagine
something what i'm writing about right
now in my new book when you're two years
old one years old
before you even had really mastered
language you're so dependent on other
people you're so open to them
that their energy gets infused it's
completely internalized and also
children at that age also have their
sort of sexual nature is being created
at that moment at a very very early age
certain desires you know for us sex is
not just a physical thing it's an
emotional thing
right we have it's psychological
so
things that we didn't get are charged
with all this kind of energy that then
could later on turn into sort of desires
so let's say for instance
you had a mother
who was very narcissistic
who really wasn't giving you the normal
mother
nurturing empathetic energy
it was more about her and you had to pay
attention to her right
well
that kind of creates the sort of desire
this you're you're as the infant you
really want that love from that mother
you're trying to drag you're trying to
attract and pull it out of her as best
you can and your energy your desire is
is surrounding her with this kind of
emotional charge
sexual energy and you're going to find
throughout your life you are going to be
attracted to narcissistic women it's
going to be your your achilles heel
throughout your life because you want to
kind of
re heal that wound you want to be able
to play back that initial trauma
and sort of rewrite the way it ended up
where now you're going to find this
narcissistic woman and she's going to
give you finally what you never had
before right it's a very very common
pattern
right and so you're not even aware of
this and it's extremely difficult to
break out of because
your desire is for this type of person
so you might meet a woman just doing it
from a man's point of view who isn't
narcissistic who's very empathetic and
very caring
and she would be perfect for you and you
may even have a relationship with her
but the excitement the energy that
charge isn't going to be as strong as
with that other type and you're going to
fall back into the old patterns again
and again and again and the only way out
of it is to go back and look at your
early childhood and look at these wounds
and confront them face to face and
understand that you're a prisoner of
this kind of these kind of things that
were ingrained at you at a very very
early age and what does that process
look like like how do you confront
something like that well how do you even
develop the awareness of the problem
well you have to look at what's going on
in the present right now you have to be
first of all it depends on how old you
are and how many relationships you have
but you have to see your own patterns
and if you have unhealthy patterns where
you have debt fallen again and again and
again for the wrong person you have to
see a sort of a through line there what
ties it all together what's going on
right
so
um you know a common scenario that i
wrote about in human nature is
in this particular scenario where your
mother is giving you the attention that
you think you want
right you have this feeling when you're
a child three or four years old that
that mother is abandoning you that's
almost your fault in that case right
because you don't want to believe
that a parent could be wrong or flawed
because it's too painful of thought so
you want to think that you are flawed
and she has abandoned you for some
reason it's very painful
so what you're going to do throughout
your life is
you're always going to be the one
cutting off a relationship before it
gets too intense so that you don't ever
have to go through that abandonment
feeling again right that's your pattern
right so after six months
the relationship is kind of you know
growing you'll find some excuse she's
not right for me she's saying the wrong
thing she's
you'll break off the relationship
blaming her when in fact you're afraid
deeply afraid that she's going to
abandon you and you can't stand that so
you've got to see these patterns and
they're very painful and they're very
difficult because they're touching upon
things that go to the heart of who we
are you know it's not just in your
relationships you're gonna probably be
doing that with your jobs as well you're
gonna be quitting jobs before they you
know before you get to the point where
you have too much responsibility
they're very very deeply ingrained in
you
and you have to be able to look at them
so awareness is everything the ability
to look at yourself
realistically and understand you're
saying see things as they are see the
world as it is it begins with yourself
seeing yourself as you are right and
seeing that your adult self that's so
confident and has this you know this way
about the world is covering over some
wounds some vulnerabilities from your
deep childhood not everybody but for a
lot of people that's the case
you have to be willing to rip away the
skin and look underneath and see that
wound and touch upon it
and then kind of analyze it
and sort of see the patterns in your
life before you can begin one thing that
you do really well which i think is
definitely part of your appeal is that
you're able to
write about these difficult things in
human nature without needing to remove
yourself so you're not doing it as a
spectator oh oh those humans over there
they've got problems um you're able to
really look at it yourself so
as
you think about this process of
ripping the skin away i think was the
the phrase that you said
and confronting that
how do you begin to to translate
what's actually happening without the
need for the ego to step in and say no
no you're
it to not go in either direction quite
frankly to either then say oh because
you have this flaw you are a loser or to
blind yourself to the flaw and say no no
that's it's not a problem like how do
people find that middle ground of
acknowledging it without succumbing to
negative emotion around it
that's a great question
um
you know so sometimes
you know you need help in these areas it
depending on the depth of the wound
so sometimes you need a third person's
eyes on it you can't necessarily analyze
it yourself
which is why you might want to go into
therapy or you might want a spouse or a
significant other or someone you love
and trust who can tell you these things
because sometimes it's very hard for you
to have any kind of distance from them
you know
but um the the ability to detach
yourself from your own emotions
is extremely important in life it
doesn't mean that you become a cold
rational person at all i don't believe
in that at all emotions are extremely
important for us it's what makes us
creative at what feeds our imagination
gives us drive
but the ability that you can gain over
your life
in this instant and in every other
instant to have a degree of detachment
not a it's only a matter of degree
where you can stand back and you feel
something very powerfully you feel
attracted to something or a person you
feel excited or repulsed and to not
react and to step back and analyze and
go
why am i feeling this right now
is it because of what somebody is saying
right now or does it go deeper to that
is it related to some other issue
that is a skill that is not easy but you
can develop it day by day by day taking
little steps and so if you're able to
slowly detach yourself from your
day-to-day emotional reactions
it gives you a little bit of distance
between you and your ego
right so
i meditate every morning i've been doing
it now for 11 years for like 40 over 40
minutes it's a ritual that if i don't do
i feel extremely depressed something's
wrong
okay and when i'm meditating
i become deeply aware these thoughts
start coming up they bubble up you can't
control them you become deeply aware of
your ego of certain patterns and you're
thinking of certain anxieties of certain
kind of neurotic thought patterns right
you're seeing it before your eyes it's
floating there this is your ego robert
it's going here there and there you can
see it
and now when you're in that state you
can almost see it as if it's another
person
and it's very powerful it's very
liberating
now in the case of someone who's dealing
with a deep wound i don't know if you
can go you can't go there like tomorrow
and do this
i'm a realistic person i'm very
practical i don't want to advise people
something that's not going to happen
it's something that you're going to have
to it's a life skill that you have to
build the the the the power to take take
a step back and look at yourself with
some distance and see that ego as if
it's over there it's floating in front
of you it's giving you signs of who you
are you know you can develop that and
it's very powerful and it will give you
the ability to look at your own wounds
objectively
but you're never going to reach
a degree of 100 detachment
me who's been practicing this for many
years i still get caught up
in those wounds i still get caught up in
my ego it's just a matter of degree that
that's all i'm talking about
this is such an insanely complicated
issue when i think about okay so if the
number one problem is people aren't
aware that there's a game being played
basically you can't take things sort of
at their surface
and then understanding that as you were
saying that self-awareness is also this
critical part
then there are the studies that have
shown that your mind will
give you a reason for something even
when that reason is obviously not true
and i don't know if you heard about that
study where people that have had the
ability to form uh long-term memories
damaged so they can do short-term
memories but you could reintroduce
yourself to them every three minutes and
they'd be like oh my god they'd greet
you anew each time
and the doctor put a pin in his hand and
he walked in and he shook hands and it
poked the person they jerked their hand
back like you know why'd you do that
they leave
they come back three minutes later the
person does not remember meeting them at
all they stick out their hand and the
person will refuse to shake it
and so they don't remember ever meeting
them before and so they'll say
why won't you shake my hand
oh well you know i've had a
long-standing rule i don't shake the
hand of people with white lab coats and
they come up with all these different
excuses because the brain can't like sit
there in this ignorance and so you have
something that's clearly hardwired in us
to to so we i have heard humans referred
to as meaning making machines which
makes a lot of sense to me we make
meaning out of something right so if we
have this hardwired propensity to come
up with some sort of meaning something
somewhere
and we have the psychological immune
system which doesn't want me to feel
badly about myself so now i have
an inclination to lie to myself
basically from some like deep seated
part of me that survives even
damage to the ability to make long-term
memories and so when i think about the
deck being stacked against people in
terms of really figuring out what's
actually going on inside themselves it
gets
a little scary and this is where so for
me when i think about okay if all the
things that i just said are true nested
inside of all the stuff you've been
talking about
the only path i see out of that is you
because everyone needs self-esteem
so your psychological immune system is
trying to make you feel good about
yourself got it
so you need to take conscious control of
feeling good about yourself
but you need to wrap it around something
anti-fragile so that for the only answer
i've come up with in my own life is to
be the learner that way if i do
something stupid i make a mistake
whatever i can just go hey that sucks
and it does make me feel badly but
i only value myself for being a learner
and since recognizing how i actually am
would be useful
then i'll face the truth of what this is
and then i can learn and move on well
you touch on an extremely important
critical thing here the element that i'm
trying to hit at which is your level of
desire for change
so if you're trapped in these patterns
and you feel a great degree of pain and
your life isn't going anywhere and
you're having bad relationships bad work
habits and you say i can't deal with
this anymore
you're extremely motivated to go through
the process that you just mentioned
which is after every event that occurs
you go through a kind of an autopsy
right and you analyze you can do this on
a daily basis with a journal or you can
do it on a weekly basis
you know what did i do there what was
the element of where i actually might
have created the problem between me and
another person
and i have to be reasonably rational and
i have to be reasonably realistic you're
right if we saw it completely into
ourselves we would hate ourselves so
thoroughly that we wouldn't get out of
bed we'd all be killing ourselves you do
need a degree of illusion you do need a
degree of self-esteem and confidence
right
and what happens is you know it's kind
of like an internal thermostat and so
you have like people who are what i call
deep narcissists
who have no kind of sense no
anchor inside of them no real sense
self-esteem to hold on to and when that
self-esteem starts going down down down
they have no way of dealing with it and
their only way of dealing with it is
acting out in the way that narcissists
act out so we all have if we're not a
deep narcissist we have that thermostat
where things
start hurting us a little bit and we
bring ourselves back up through this
self-esteem mechanism so we don't get
too depressed and too down there's an
element of unreality to that but it's
very valuable and i would never ever
ever want to burst that you need a
degree of illusion in your life it's
very important
but if you really want change if you're
really fed up
if you're not kidding yourself if you're
not going through this [__] process
yeah i kind of want to change my life
but you don't really mean it
then nothing you no words no no therapy
will ever get you to that point you
almost have to hit bottom
you almost have to tell yourself i can't
take this anymore and now the motivation
is so deep that you're able now to go
through to begin the process of going
through that kind of self analysis
because that's the only way you're going
to get out of it it's the only way
you know a lot of the of of our culture
is making this worse in a way
unfortunately i mean there's good things
in our culture no but there are bad
things give me some of the bad well i
think
social media
for all the good that it does makes it
very hard to be self-reflective
interesting i i thought for sure you
were going to say just leads us to
compare ourselves why does it make it
hard to be self-referring well it does
well comparing yourself is not
self-reflective
when you compare yourself your standard
is always what other people are doing
right
they're on these great vacations he's
got a great job tom has this amazing
house where i'm living in this hovel in
los feliz right that's not looking at
myself that's always having the other
person as the standard it makes us so
out in the world in other people but
other people are saying what other
people are doing it makes us continually
think in the social sense and not able
to turn inside and look at how who we
are what makes us different
we're so attuned to what's cool to what
other people are doing out there what
other people are saying that we lose a
kind of an intuitive grasp of who we are
right so
the psychologist abraham maslow talked
of impulse
voices he said that a child of one years
old has this impulse voice that says
i like this fruit i don't like this
fruit i'm gonna throw it away right
and and then other things these voices
inside that make them that individual
this is what they like and what they
hate
right these are very very important as
you develop later in life you know this
is what you love these are the subjects
that interest you these are subjects
you're not interested these are the
people you like these people you don't
like it's who you are in the deepest
sense of it it's your what i call your
primal inclinations it's you at its core
and if you're so attuned to what other
people are saying and doing and telling
you and thinking that voice gets drowned
out by a million other voices and you're
not able to hear yourself anymore and
it's very hard to take a step back and
actually look at yourself and analyze
yourself
so i think that in some ways this this
dilemma that we're talking about is
getting more and more difficult because
to be able to do what you're talking
about you have to be willing to be alone
you have to be willing to close the door
in your room write down and say this is
what's going on this is what happened
this is what i did this is what they did
you can't be
out there in the world and do this it's
impossible to do that process because
you're going to be sucked into the
social dynamic and you won't be able to
think about yourself so i think it's
made things a little bit harder for
people
that's really interesting and oh man the
the human condition is
utterly fascinating it does not seem
designed to
make us enjoy it or
you know it literally seems survival is
like the only uh consideration
and that can be obviously very difficult
for people so
as people navigate the
modern world as they try to make their
way through something like that what are
the tools and approaches um that you
recommend to people
well it's kind of what the subject of
sort of what the daily laws is about
there's there's two things
so um
you know the the the source of your
power in life
is your attitude towards the world and
in in human nature i kind of describe
what i believe an attitude is it's your
lens it's your way of looking at the
world everybody's lens is different
you're not seeing things exactly as they
are you're seeing them filtered through
how you look at them
some people are so important yeah some
people are optimistic and adventurous
some people are anxious and closed
and you could put two people
in the same circumstances visiting the
same place
the pessimistic anxious person will find
it unpleasant people are rude i don't
like it the adventurous exploring type
will find the circumstances very
exciting but it's the same thing it's
just you're judging in a different way
so the lens that you want you want a
lens that clarifies things you want a
lens that's realistic that you're trying
to see things as they are
right it's good to be excited but
sometimes if you're too excited and too
adventurous you're going to walk right
up to that tiger and they're going to
eat you alive sometimes you have to be a
little bit wary of things you have to
see your circumstances for what for what
they are
in military terms they call it
situational awareness you're very aware
crystal clear about who you are about
who other people are about what the
world is like so that's the attitude
that you want to craft for yourself in
this world and it's very difficult as
you've been saying very eloquently the
cards are stacked against you
a because of how we're wired you know
our brains developed 200 000 years ago
in circumstances that certainly aren't
the way things are now so we're so
there's kind of a a gap there between
you know how how we're wired to think
and what's going on in the 21st century
and b we're dealing with technology
that's making things harder
so you your goal in life is to become
more realistic to be able to step back
and look at things as they are
and how do you get there is the question
so first you have to see that as your
goal and it has to be important to you
it has to be something that you want and
it's not just something that's cold and
dry and scientific really fast why is
that the right goal why is that the
right goal yeah to see i agree with you
i just want to see how you explain it to
people why it matters to see the world
the way that it actually is
well
okay imagine it this way so there's
yourself everything begins with you
right you're filled with all kinds of
illusions about who you are about what
you're good at what you're bad at what
your weaknesses are what your strengths
are
if you're able to see inside of yourself
with a degree of realism you'll be able
to understand
this is what i was destined to be in
life this is what i call my life's task
this is the career that's that fits me
that suits me
so if you're able to have that realism
when you're 22 years old you're not
going to suddenly go off on this wrong
career path that's going to make you
miserable make you an alcoholic by the
time you're 30 you're going to have a
degree of direction in life it's
incredibly liberating it's incredibly
powerful to be able to see inside of
yourself and know what you were destined
for and what makes you you
other people
other people wear masks they smile but
they doesn't their smile doesn't mean
anything
there are toxic people out there it's
not everybody i don't mean to make you
paranoid maybe there's like five percent
of the world that's truly toxic
every single human being i can guarantee
you has had to deal with these talks of
people in a way that's painful
and you don't see them you know they're
very tricky these are people who've
learned to disguise themselves
you're going to get sucked into all
these dramas and traumas with these
people
can make your life miserable imagine you
had a realistic attitude and you could
see through these people you could catch
before you get involved with them signs
of that they might be one of these types
another thing that's incredibly
liberating the world that you live in
there's a zeitgeist there's a spirit of
the times there are trends there's
things that are going on right now in
your career in the world at large
and we're fed with so much [__] in
the media we have no idea what's really
going on the ability to see this is
where the world headed is headed this is
where business will be in two years this
is where things are going to be these
are the trends
the power so the power to see inside
yourself the power inside to see other
people to see the world
you know you're superman if you can do
that if you can have a degree of that
the world is at your feet basically so
you know i don't think there's any
counter-argument to that where you don't
want that kind of realism
and it's not this ugly thing it's
incredibly sexy because it's incredibly
powerful
right
so we've now come to the point you and i
we agree that that's what you want
the person out there is going yeah i
want that as well okay robert that's
fine how do i get there aha
well
you have to be patient
you have to know it's a process
you can't get ahead of yourself you
can't get ahead of your skis it's going
to take day by day by day by day you
have to build it up you're working
against your own nature you're working
against the times so be patient be
compassionate with yourself and learn to
take these baby steps
and in the book daily laws i have a lot
of different ways of attacking that the
main way of attacking it is learning the
ability as we talked about earlier to be
able to detach yourself from the
immediate events going on and to be able
to look at yourself with a degree of
dispassion and say
this is what i did really did
what really happened here so just a
simple example
something kind of doesn't go the way you
wanted to which will happen almost every
day or every week you know with your
children with your spouse with your boss
wherever
okay
what is your normal reaction every
single human including myself
blame that person
they're not caring they're not
empathetic they're an [__] there's
they're narcissistic blah blah blah
stop it stop it right now don't do that
again
step back and say what did i do
okay if that person is toxic why am i
involved with them there's something
wrong about me
if that person
got reactive and resentful and they had
a bad tone of voice something that i
said
maybe there was something in me that was
projecting kind of negativity maybe my
own mood wasn't really was kind of
creating this atmosphere that made them
react that way
look at yourself instead of blaming
other people
you know these are parts of the process
there are many others but yeah dude that
is so huge
people always so i have a
saying that i like that most people
[__] hate which is everything is my
fault
i love it it's so useful
so uh
fault is a word that
gives people i don't know emotional
distress or something so they don't like
when i use that phrase um but what i
like to remind myself is that if i did
something different i could get a
different outcome right and that's so
powerful to me to not by blaming
somebody else by making it their fault i
give away all my power and there's
nothing i can do about it and now i'm
sort of a victim of circumstance
but man when you take 100 ownership and
you look at your life and say my life is
an exact reflection of choices that i've
made now if i want it to be different
then i just need only make different
choices
completely and and one of the things
that's like that is
if something went wrong
maybe and i'm to blame just accept it
just accept the fact that it happened
don't try to change it but just say that
this has happened and i'm not going
gonna fight it and it's just my fate in
life you know it's okay
right
so the ability to accept things is also
taking ownership of them so if something
bad happens and you can't really control
it because let's be honest there are
times that you can't control things
they're just going to happen who
predicted a pandemic you can't control
that right
so your first reaction is to get all
pissy and go dammit why did heaven [__]
[__] [__] i'm a victim blah blah okay
that's just going to make you more
depressed more inward more
harder to act in the world whereas if
you say okay
i can't control the pandemic it's a
terrible thing but i'm going to roll
with the punches i'm going to accept the
way things are i'm not going to fight it
this is the way the world is what can i
get out of it what kind of benefit
well
maybe i can reassess my career maybe
before the pandemic happened i was just
headed in this path
and i wasn't i was kind of blind maybe
i'm not really happy with what i am i'm
not happy with my relationships with my
career maybe i need to reassess it maybe
it's time for me to be alone and read
books and and study and learn new skills
etc so the ability to to accept things
that you can't change and to see some
benefit from them is also part of that
i want to go back to emotions so
we've talked about how emotions are
incredibly powerful you um i don't think
you use this example in the book but it
was certainly along these lines that if
you damage the region of somebody's
brain that deals with the emotional
centers they can't make decisions which
is absolutely
just insane to me
um and
you also have a quote in the book though
that i wrote down that i would like to
share with people now and
for clarity's sake i actually agree with
both sides of this so you've got the
side that you talked about where if you
damage the emotional centers of
somebody's brain they can't make a
decision and then you also had um
a quote and i don't know why my
the app has crashed that i have the
quota i can paraphrase it if i can't get
this out here we go i think i can get it
now
um
nope not opening so the paraphrase of
the quote is that emotions are
essentially a disease looking for a
remedy
and i was like yes yes you can't just
believe your emotions or maybe that's
not the right way to think about it but
you can't just take them on board and
because i have this feeling i'm going to
act on it or it represents truth right
help people understand first give us
that like what do you mean how is it
possible that my emotions aren't
necessarily useful or true
and then we'll balance it with the idea
of how important emotions actually are
well
in in a japanese zen way your emotions
are truth because you are feeling the
way you're feeling okay so that's real
right but it could stem from a very
false source
as well okay so
let's just go back to that example that
i gave earlier
of the young boy who was
felt abandoned by his mother right
and his whole pattern in his life is to
be the one that's doing the abandoning
so he's not abandoning himself
so in the moment that he's with this
woman within this relationship that's
been going on
he's starting to feel
something's wrong with her she's bad
she's she's not right for me she's gonna
you know i better leave this
relationship right he's not reacting on
what she's doing
his emotions are not coming from which
she could be perfectly fine she could be
totally loving he's projecting on to her
his own emotions what he feels is
genuine he genuinely feels that
something is wrong but it doesn't come
from the truth itself it comes from some
deeper much deeper pain
so your emotions
you feeling them but the source of them
you have no idea what the source is
right
so
you know you exploded somebody in your
office tomorrow because of something
and then you don't realize that in the
morning you were already put in a bad
mood by something that somebody else
said and that kind of made you prone to
like exploding later on in the day
you are seeing that other person that
triggered you but you're not seeing what
happened earlier in the day that set the
tone for it that planted the seed for
your being triggered right
so you don't have access to the source
of what's really causing your emotions
now
i'll be honest you're never going to get
true access to the actual source of it
because there's something buried very
deep inside
who knows where it came from who knows
how young you were who knows really
the unconscious processes that were
going on
okay so you're never going to get at the
core the real truth but you're going to
get closer to it you can and you cannot
react in the moment you can say
if this you're this young man who's
trapped in this pattern it's very
difficult the thing to go but
am i being is it true that she's
actually being like that if i actually
step back and analyze her words
they're totally neutral she's not being
mean or vicious she's not about to leave
me
right or she's not betraying me in any
way
it's totally neutral right and i often
go through that process i've been in a
relationship for a long time where i get
a little bit upset and angry and i'm
blaming her and blah blah blah
and i have to go back like it takes a
couple hours for the microwave to kind
of cool down right and you go
no way man
she why does she feel the way she's
feeling well it probably comes from me
but i'm i'm totally projecting onto her
right
so just the idea
that you are projecting your emotions
onto people just the idea that you're
reacting to something that's an illusion
it's a mirage is liberating enough
because it's going to prevent you from
doing stupid things
how many times i've had this problem
do you get angry and you send that angry
email
voicing all of your upset and just
pleasure
and then two hours later you go [__] i
wish i hadn't said that i wish i hadn't
revealed my vulnerability i wish i had
maybe i was it was i overreacted right
so the ability to to write that email
and then put it in the draft folder and
never send it and you know i have this
thing in my own uh computer where in my
email that draft folder is getting
larger and larger it's got 12 it's got
20 it's got 80 things in it that shows
me 80 times i have put that thing into
the draft folder and i have a degree of
control
so
yeah the idea that
they're one that you don't have full
access to everything that led you to
react the way that you did and two that
to some extent it's an illusion
so you call it attitude i call it frame
of reference i've given my entire
professional life to the idea that frame
of reference may be the single most
important thing in the determining the
outcome of your life
so looking at right now in much of the
developed world your zip code is the
number one predictor of your future
success so
were it your iq i could understand that
but the fact that it just is where you
happen to grow up
that's really really distressing to me
and so having worked in the inner cities
a lot and seeing up close what the
problem is you encounter people with
incredible intellect
but as you watch them process the data
they're processing it through a filter
and that filter is what you call
attitude and
when it encounters an attitude that
isn't helpful you get an outcome that's
like a fun house mirror and you're like
what the way that you're looking at this
doesn't make sense in the following way
you have a goal and the way you're
thinking about things either your goal
makes no sense it won't optimize for
fulfillment or joy
or you have a goal that makes sense and
the way that you're parsing the data
does not lead you to take actions that
will actually move you towards that goal
right and so it becomes this
really
um distressing question of okay somebody
gets to adulthood they have an attitude
or a frame of reference that isn't
helping them
accurately
it isn't helping them process data in a
way that will move them towards a useful
goal that's the the cleanest most
truthful way to say it so then the
question becomes what can you do
to begin reformulating
that attitude that frame of reference in
order to get you where you want to go do
you think at all about
the like what is the atomized thing that
makes up the attitude for me it's
beliefs your frame of reference is is a
reflection of i'll call it roughly 25
beliefs that you have get those beliefs
right you're a-okay get those beliefs
wrong and you've got a real problem but
the atomized thing for me is a belief
what's the atomized version of an
attitude for you
well i'm not quite sure i understand the
beliefs part but i'm trying to
um
explain it do you want me to explain it
yeah all right so
the most important one so i've actually
written down the 25 that i think make
this up but there's one that's really
important
it's what i call the only belief that
matters which is that in fact you talk
about this in your book mastery is
essentially about this idea that if you
put time and energy into getting good at
something you will actually get good at
it right and that thing has utility in
the real world now if you believe that
then you'll pick up the guitar and
you'll start practicing you'll sit down
at the typewriter and you'll start
writing if you don't believe it it
wouldn't make sense to pick up a guitar
you're either good at it from birth or
you're not and so why would you bother
right that one belief will bifurcate
your entire life because you're either
gonna lean into just the things you
think you're already naturally gifted at
and your life will be limited by
whatever that is or you will spend a
massive amount of time and energy
gaining mastery right and those two same
person
but those are wildly divergent outcomes
yeah i i think that's that's that's very
true um i don't know atomizing i think i
might just basically being agree with
you i would maybe say the stories that
we tell ourselves which comes down to
the same thing because i've discovered
in
my meditation that the way the brain
works is continually telling us stories
about the world about ourselves about
the way people are and i don't mean
stories in it's literally what i'm
saying it's like constructed like a
story it has a narrative arc to it right
this is what happened to me and and the
story is constructed and this is the
result and what the story i'm telling
myself might not be the correct story at
all right so being able to understand
what really happened what is the
actually the story that that occurred
there is extremely important and so
you're hitting on the bedrock which is
extremely fundamental which is
do you believe that you're capable of
change
do you believe that good things happen
when you go through a process of
learning and taking steps do you believe
going back to your belief that you can
actually get out of your patterns
because you can be fooling yourself you
can be bullshitting you can be saying
yeah i kind of do but deep down inside
you don't really want to do it because
believe it or not your bad patterns give
you a degree of comfort
right it's something that you know
and to get out of them you're suddenly
thrust into the unknown and that could
be very frightening so you could be
holding on to these bad patterns so the
belief that
i can change
i can actually do something different in
my life i can actually recreate myself i
can actually learn things i can actually
rewire my brain because the brain is
incredibly plastic even at the age of 40
50 you can change your career you can
learn new skills you know i've reached
60 i'm constantly learning as well the
brain is insanely plastic do you believe
that do you believe that you have the
possibility to change yourself to alter
your patterns that's probably the single
most important thing right there and to
get people to believe that as i said
there's two levels there's the people
who will shake their head yeah yeah yeah
they'll read mastery but it won't mean
anything to them because
they're afraid
of the change
they're comfortable with a degree of
failure i hate to say because if you
don't try things you never have to deal
with the responsibility the pain of
failure right
so you don't really want to change deep
down inside you don't really believe in
tom's number one
belief right you're kind of fooling
yourself
so it's not a fairy tale it's not a
bunch of a myth that we're creating it's
true that you have the power the brain
if you just understood this one thing
that the brain is like a landscape
it's like a landscape out in the world
that you see where things can be lush
and tropical or they can be completely
arid and dead
you create that landscape yourself you
create the brain that you have by the
degree of how you're open to experience
by the degree of how much you learn by
the degree of how many different sources
of information you take in you can
create this incredibly alive brain
that's very creative imaginative and how
much more fun will your life be if
you're open and you let things come in
and new ideas come in
so it's up to you you're the one that's
creating your misery it's creating your
patterns it's and it comes down to that
bedrock one belief that you just
mentioned i think we touched on it a
little bit the last time we spoke it's
an incredibly interesting idea that you
feel like the right person to explore
partly because you do take a certainly a
darker look at life than i do and for
some reason i find myself completely
drawn to that flame
uh of the way that you look at the world
maybe because it's good sort of
disconfirming evidence for me it doesn't
just put me in my own loop
um
but
the guy who people say
some people say that you know
robert you shouldn't write these books
this is like evil machiavellian content
the world is better off not you know
sort of turning a blind eye to this
which i heartily disagree with but
for that person to now be touching on
the sublime what drew you to that
well um it's it's i could go on forever
about this i'll try and keep it
reasonably short but
i've been interested in this idea from
15 probably 20 years it's i don't know i
read an article i read a book about it a
long time ago
really excited me
and i meant to be my fourth book after i
finished war i started researching it
and then i got um disrupt distracted by
the 50 cent book that i did
then came mastery and then came human
nature and finally i took a breath and
said all right this is the time for the
sublime it's going to be my next book
and the 18th chapter of the law of human
nature is about confronting your
mortality and i talk about that the
sublime in that chapter
and the idea is that here's how i
explain the sublime it's kind of like a
circle if you can imagine human life as
a circle social life to be a human means
in any time period the culture that we
live in creates a circle and in that
circle is a limit to what you're allowed
to believe in what you're allowed to
think
your behavior there are codes and
conventions and rules that we all
ascribe to they're not the same as what
they were in ancient egypt
3 500 years ago but back then they had a
circle it was just a different circle
right okay
so you're not supposed to think these
thoughts you're not supposed to do this
that's that this is the circle that we
live in
just outside that circle is the realm of
the sublime it's something that we're
not really ever supposed to think about
or we're not really supposed to ever do
it's something that's filled with a
slight transgressive energy a level of
excitement
because deep down inside of human nature
we don't like limits
we rebel against them we want to be free
our spirits are yearning to be free and
that sense of these are codes that you
have to abide by is very restricting it
feels like a prison almost so we're
inevitably attracted to things outside
of that and that is the realm of the
sublime and it's incredibly exciting it
contains so much energy because in that
circle all of your energy is kind of
crushed and compounded inside of you
it's kind of you have to feel this we
have to do this when you let go and you
go explore outside of it it's like
suddenly you're tapping into something
that's in the cosmos incredibly
energizing it's what maslow called a
peak experience right
okay so the ultimate form of going
beyond that circle is death itself
death is the ultimate limit obviously to
our lives and people who have peered
through that door
because the word sublime literally means
up to the threshold
that's the latin up to the threshold of
a door so imagine that circle has all
these little doors in it and you're
peering through it this is something
that i haven't thought of before right
um
the ultimate door is death right and
people who've peered through that door
have had a near-death experience a
little bit to some degree
it changes you
it's like that is the biggest blast of
the sublime that you can get that's the
strongest form of the drug imaginable
you no longer look at being alive
anymore the same way you no longer see
the trees the birds the the people that
you love in the same way do you ever get
universally that people see something
better than they did no
it's not true
it's a good point there have been
studies
of near-death experiences
i don't remember the percentage but
there is a percentage the smaller
percentage that has a negative
experience
it's very painful and ugly and demonic
and hellish and no they're not having
this so thank you for bringing that up
that's true
but most people for most people
it has this effect where
and the reasons why the people have the
hellish view there are other things
going on it's not that's just not normal
um
is
you know you you came very close to
death and you're alive
so everything has a different meaning to
you right things that you took for
granted before no longer have that same
sense
and there are other things that go on
well anyway the typical to my story here
i wrote that chapter with those ideas in
mind
and then
two three months later i came this close
to dying myself
so what had been this intellectual
abstract argument about near-death
sublime blah blah blah became very real
right i was in a coma
i was driving my car if my girlfriend
hadn't stopped made me pull over
if the medics hadn't come quickly i
would have permanent brain damage or i
would be dead i came very close i was in
a coma
i didn't have like visions of of you
know angels etc and all the other things
that people sometimes claim they have
but i had some very strange things
some feelings in my body that
not as often anymore but i still
sometimes get a feeling that my bones
were kind of melting from the inside
it was kind of like a sort of dissolving
what was solid about me was dissolving
right and then a sense of
a very it's only for a brief second and
sometimes i'm not even sure if it's true
or not but i had an image of me
up above looking down and i had i had
died and people were talking about me
right
i'm not sure whether my brain in memory
is playing a trick on me but i seem to
have that recollection
anyway
it became very real to me this subject
right and so now
it wasn't just this intellectual or
thing about writing a book about the
sublime it was very very real
the last thing i'll say is
when i originally planned the book back
in 2005 or so
i was going to be jetting off to tierra
del fuego to see you know the the south
pole i was going to go swimming with
dolphins in the caribbean i was going to
be going on top of you know mount
everest i don't know whatever that kind
of stuff
having sublime experiences
obviously i had a stroke i can't even
really walk outside my house and take a
normal hike i can barely walk a few
blocks
i can't do any of these things
right so what i've had to discover is
because i can only write a book if i'm
in the mood of the book
right
so i have to be feeling sublime to write
the book
i have to find it in everyday things i
have to find it in the little garden in
my house i have to find it in the cats
in my house
in my girlfriend you know and out in in
her eyes
looking outside my window in the books
that i'm reading i have to suck the
sublime out of every little trivial
little affair that i goes on in my life
and putting that in the book i think
will so if i had written that other book
people were going oh that's great but
this guy this kind of rich white guy
he's able to fly off here that does
nothing to do with my life
i'm living
as a stricter life as you can imagine
there are people much more restricted
than me but pretty damn restricted and
yet i'm able to find this in my daily
life if i can find it there's no barrier
for other people no matter if you're
flipping burgers and mcdonald's the
world is sublime
and it's all around you and you don't
have to go to tierra del fuego to to
experience that
i want to get more into
what the sublime is actually so
i honestly it's a word that i never
really thought of okay i feel like i
have an intuitive understanding that
it's something sort of surprising and
wonderful
but with uh
not sort of
big
um
amplitude's the wrong word but there's
there's something relaxed about it like
uh a warm bath is sublime you know but
this idea of it being a threshold
something that you're seeing beyond into
something new that's a new take on it
for me which is far more interesting
well it's it's the sublime is not a warm
bath quite the opposite it's a mix of
pleasure and pain it's a mix of two
opposing emotions a sense of fear and a
sense of awe
almost consecutively or at the same time
right
so
if you go to see a horror movie or
you're on a roller coaster
the excitement comes from the fact that
you feel kind of at risk that there's
sort of danger there but you're safe
right
so you're feeling two things at the same
time kind of anxiety and kind of about
the pleasure that you're actually not
being threatened
so
neuroscientists have shown that the
mixing of two sort of contrary emotions
creates an incredible intensity of
affect much more than just a single
emotion so the quintessential experience
of the sublime when it was first
written about in the 18th century
was climbing uh the alps the matterhorn
or wherever it was right
and you got a sense of how small you
were
how you know you could die very easily
if there's an avalanche
and how you know how fragile you were in
the face of this immensity
and yet the awesomeness of it the beauty
of it was overwhelming and so they were
fascinated with this idea of being able
to feel these two contrary emotions at
the same time so it's not at all a warm
bath
um i can only
the the sublime is an experience it's
hard to it's something hard to put into
words so robert's trying to write a book
about it i know believe me believe me i
know but let me give you an idea give me
one example of something that is
so insanely sublime that you can't ever
think the same about the world after you
contemplate this
okay so
here you and i are sitting here talking
in this incredibly high-tech amazing
house with all the insane technology
around us all right consider this
our planet
some 4 billion years old around 3.1
billion years in some little
bit of pond
some kind of organic life began we don't
know how or why or what triggered all
those scientists are getting closer
some form of single-celled bacteria cro
self-created itself out of chemicals
that came from other planets right
carbon etc okay
this single-celled bacteria dominated
the planet for billions of years it was
the only form of life right
okay and then sometime in the past
i i've forgotten the exact time frame in
my mind it's in my book
the first
multicellular creature was created maybe
that was two billion years ago or so
okay and it was a complete freak
accident
one piece bacteria swallowed another
bacteria and created a multicellular
organism it's only happened once in the
history of our planet once
contemplate that
we know that because there's only one
line of dna that we can trace back to
the first time that it happened there's
not a second line of dna only one
so it happened once
it's never happened again
it was a freakish example if that hadn't
happened
forget everything else that occurred on
this planet okay but it did happen okay
so these are called bottlenecks certain
things occurred that created um
evolution go in a certain direction and
they could have occurred differently
i'll skip to 60 million years ago
when
a an asteroid the size of new york city
hit earth hid in in the yucatan
peninsula
and it was the most insane explosion
ever like the equivalent of all the
nuclear bombs on our planet
it destroyed the dinosaurs it destroyed
99 of the life on this planet right it
was the holocaust of all holocausts
if it and this meteor almost missed the
earth asteroid very easily could have
missed the planet because think of the
emptiness of space and the smallness of
earth it was a freak accident
if that hadn't happened
dinosaurs would still be walking around
here mammals would have never emerged as
the dominant creature i'll skip to 80
000 years ago
humans at that point there were only
like 10 000 humans left on the planet
if one single virus
i'm talking about homo sapiens
one single virus would have wiped us out
at that point we were extremely
vulnerable if that number had gotten
down further
anything could have wiped us out right a
change in climate etc okay
if that had happened
we wouldn't be here
and neanderthals would have probably
taken over the planet and who knows what
that would look like right now okay
then
think of your own parents
and how unlikely was there ever meeting
and the circle the fate that happened
there
if they hadn't met tom wouldn't be here
or you'd be somebody else
right
there are 70 000 generations more or
less going into you going back to the or
first homo sapien all right
that one time encounter between you and
your parents multiplied by 70 000 chance
encounters
so to bring us to the present that you
and i are sitting here together in this
office with all this stuff around us
it's you and it's me
the odds against it are so unbelievably
astronomical that you can't even compute
so what does that make you think about
that what you what's happening to you
right now
if you really contemplate it it will
alter how you think about everything
everything you see around you the plants
the animals they didn't have to be that
way it's extremely unlikely
it's a weird world that we live in right
so that is an example of a sublime
thought
it's a little bit scary because it has
to do with annihilation holocaust deaths
but it's also
an awesome thought about the fact that
you're just alive
so that's that's sort of and it's
something i went into in the second
chapter of my book
i find this so interesting so
how
how do we make use of that
and
why
is it so
useful
well the reason it's so useful and this
is what i just did in my third chapter
is
it's wired into our nature
so a lot of things are wired that aren't
so good that we could talk about but
the need for transcendent experiences
the need to be taken out of ourselves
which is the source of all of our
religious all of our spiritual beliefs
and all of our the art that we create
almost everything that we humans do
goes back to our earliest ancestors
right
and being the first conscious beings on
this on this planet conscious in the way
that our brains are conscious
they looked at this world and they saw
things that go
you know i'm talking about aborigines in
australia
how did this world happen how did this
occur
how could it be that there are stars and
plants and kangaroos it's insane and
right and they had these kind of sublime
thoughts and out of that they created
gods and spirits and all sorts of forces
okay but that awesome feeling that
feeling of why why are things the way
they are why is there something and not
nothing is very much wired into our
nature and to deny it
is very painful and so what i talk about
in the book is
if you're not going after the sublime
you're going to go after the false
sublime and the false sublime will be
drugs it'll be alcohol it'll be joining
some kind of
ugly political campaign in which you get
all your yaya's out and you feel angry
and violent blah blah blah right
you know on and on and on it could be
porn
you know online porn etc the kind of
drugs that take you outside of yourself
but are kind of ugly and they're and
they're addicting and they're not
liberating so if you're not going after
this you're going to find it in some
other way and it's not going to be
healthy
and
you want this in your life because
it gives you a kind of peace and it
gives you a scale of priorities
you know if if the big bang occurred
some 13 14 billion years ago and started
this whole thing off
what does my little 80 90 years of
existence mean
this is like a flash it's like a pop of
a popcorn in in this in in the eternity
of time
it doesn't mean anything it's it's so
small
so why does it matter so it's calming
actually it's calming you down it's
making you think the things that are
happening right now aren't as big as i
think they are
so you want this in your life
then you ask me how do you get it is
that your question yeah so as you were
explaining it i thought um some people i
think are
[Music]
gonna brush it off maybe they don't um
stop to really let that hit them
and so when you were talking i thought
okay is this why so i've never done
psychedelics but
i have a feeling
whether it's a zen cohen whether it's a
psychedelic whether it's
using your ability to shape your own
attitude to suck the sublime out of
these simple moments
there's something
to your point about we're hardwired for
it there's something necessary about
jarring us out of
our frame of reference right that
is
if evolution is selected for it there's
something necessary maybe to combat
our ideas calcifying into dogma there's
something in there that's critically
important and so i'm just curious for
people that
don't know how to suck the sublime out
of the marrow of a simple moment
how they do it
well the how they do it is is is is
through my book i'm afraid
because the book you haven't finished
writing yet yeah i'm only a fourth of
the way through you give us tidbits in
in the daily laws so i will i will thank
you for that yeah a couple chapters are
in there
um
the reason i say that i'm not trying to
hype myself is there are lots of books
written about the sublime particularly
in terms of art and in terms of like
cultural history
but they're very academic
they're very kind of boring which is
very paradoxical
because it's the last subject in the
world that should be boring
so the book that i'm trying to write
is
obviously inspirational but it's also
very practical
so each chapter the last section i
include exercises for you to practice in
your life they're going to make what i
just wrote about actionable and in the
very end i give you meditations
three things to meditate on every day
that'll make this part of your daily
life part of your daily practice right
so i'm trying to make it
as as practical as possible
so for instance the first chapter is
about the cosmic sublime which is in the
daily laws
about the big bang about the origin of
stars about our own sun and our own
planet and how insane all that is
right
and i talked to you about how you can
have
that feeling of the cosmos being created
by doing certain things in your daily
life you can visit certain landscapes
you don't have to climb mount everest
you can just go to the nearest mountain
around you put your phone away
right leave that behind
go alone if you can or bring somebody
with you and you don't talk interesting
and just so you can
think
no just immerse yourself in this world
i've given you now pages of how unlikely
it is that a mountain exists i've
explained to you where the mountain came
from i've explained to you
how unlikely the birds in the sky are
and how unlikely life is
and now you're in it
and now you're seeing at night if you if
you camp out you're seeing the night sky
you don't have to have money to do that
you can go out anytime to the nearest
mountain or hill and to have that
experience right
there are other landscapes as well
anything having to do with water
water is the most weird thing if you
ever think about it because as far as we
know
we're the only planet that we know of
that has the form of water that we have
and we're looking for other planets that
have it form of water yeah well there's
no more water on mars it might be buried
underneath underground
or they have water they have liquid
on it's liquid gas on jupiter and saturn
but they don't have our form of water
there's certainly a planet out there
that will have it but water came to us
from from the sky it didn't sound
something natural to earth it came from
rain it came from comets and asteroids
that left left it here these are
molecules that aren't natural to our
planet
when you're
swimming in water
you're like inside of it it's the only
element when you're in a mountain you're
not inside the mountain you're not
inside the dirt and the stone but you're
in water you're in it
it's part of your body it's incorporated
in you and to imagine
the vastness of water
so the cosmos is this vastness this
infinity
water is a touch of that infinity
there's no beginning or end to water
there's no kind of limit to it so i'm
giving you these places like deserts
that you can go to where you can have a
touch of that i also tell you
on the internet and i give you all the
links
here's where you can look
at things that um
what's like the hubble telescope has
photographed
it is insane the images that we can now
look at it is one of the most beautiful
things about living in the 21st century
they have photographed a black hole
i describe in that chapter what a black
hole is
to
black hole is something you can't even
imagine and yet they have photographed
it but just photographing the farthest
reaches of our galaxy the thoughts
that'll inspire so it is very practical
but you have to read my book
i'm very open all you have to do is
publish it
that's incredible so
i find it very um
i don't know the right way to frame this
other than to say that while i wouldn't
wish a stroke on anybody the fact that
you in particular are able to bring back
the lessons from that
what are you doing on a daily basis to
get those um joyful moments despite all
the restrictions
well i have to be honest it's a struggle
you know some days i'm very successful
and i feel very excited and happy
some days it's like i've got tourette's
syndrome i'm just walking around going
i'm so upset i'm so frustrated
and so
i'm daily having to struggle with myself
and
so whenever i feel that level the
frustration is very easy to explain
imagine that you can't really button
your shirt that your left hand is so
weak
that you it it takes you forever to put
in your shirt to get dressed in the
morning takes like 10 20 minutes
to like get my vitamins off the shelf is
this kind of ordeal i can't type so just
my hands
so you take for granted you out there
you take for granted your use of your
hands brother i can tell you the hand or
sister that hand is a miracle you have
no idea if you lost one of your hands
what a nightmare it would be
don't take it for granted the fine
little things that your hands can do
because i can't do them anymore
you know i can't walk in a normal way
i'm always kind of losing my balance i
have to hold on to things etc like so
the frustration
is every single day
there's a tenseness like am i going to
fall am i going to drop this can i hold
on to this can i get this done
and it builds up until your your body
starts getting tense before anything
ever happens
so i have to fight that and i have to
feel it before it happens and i have to
go through kind of a mantra of
you are getting better you're just not
aware of it robert
it's something you can't see it's so
gradual that it's going to take three or
four more years calm down it's not like
it's this is going to be you forever
etcetera etcetera other times i don't
believe my mantra and i get upset
so it is a daily daily struggle
and i can go through weeks
where the struggle seems great and i'm
fine and then suddenly i'll fall through
this hole where i'm just like
damn it
you know i see people walking by on the
street taking a hike just three years
ago that was who i was it's not who i am
now i'm like a different person i want
to cry you know
i can't do
the things that gave me pleasure
so sometimes i can't control it when i
see
things in the world that remind me of my
past life
but i had to find compensation so
i can't take a hike up into the
beautiful griffith park
which is very beautiful with incredible
woods up there something i love doing i
can't ride a bicycle but i found a a
recumbent bike
it's basically a tricycle a souped-up
tricycle
right but i got the top of the line
trike recumbent trike right the best you
can get the fastest the lightest weight
one and now i'm able to go up these
incredible hills it was like
obviously slower than normal people
a normal bike but i can go up the
biggest hill you can imagine
and i do it and i go up into the hills
and the woods and i'm alone and it's my
therapy
and i
know that it's ephemeral that it only
lasts for like half an hour an hour
i'm
suck every second of joy out of that
being in the woods that i can being
alone and being away from everything so
i've had to find compensations you know
i had to look at the little things
around me and find insanely
beautiful things about them also
i had the kind of stroke that damages
the right side of the brain
which has an effect on you many ways but
the main thing is
it
crea you can't your right side of your
brain isn't communicating to the left
side so your left arm your left leg
isn't getting signals from the brain
that's why i can't do the things i can't
do
but
it saved my cognitive abilities so if
it's hitting my left side which people
have strokes
that's the kind of people that lose the
ability to talk
they can't really think straight i
wouldn't be able to write a book
so every day
three o'clock if i'm lucky after i've
exercised i sit down i'm with my sublime
book with my notebook
i'm in heaven
nobody bothering me please don't call me
if you call me i'm gonna cuss you i'm
gonna get the [__] out of my hair i'm
only working on my book
i am the happiest little baby in the
world
you know because that book is saving me
it's my therapy so i've found
compensations
but you know we talked earlier about
patients i'm patient in some sense
you know to write a book but i'm also
impatient in another sense right i'm
impatient with my body with my physical
things i want to be able to do things
now
and so i've had to learn
a different form like a meta patients
and a whole other level of patients and
and it's a work in progress that's all i
can say talk to me about hope how is it
you know as you
do physical therapy and try things and
you make some progress but not as much
as you want how do you continue to renew
your hope
it's it's the
most
hardest thing and it's the most
important thing i can tell you um
because the moments that i don't feel
hope
i'm just kind of ready to give up
you know i mean what's the point of this
so i have to continually
rekindle it and it's been a roller
coaster ride because
in the beginning people will say robert
you've got to try this you've got to try
hyperbaric chambers you've got to try
this this accuscope that this guy has
you have to try the stem cell research
you have to go this and that
i get my hopes up oh all right i'll
spend thousands of dollars on this new
form of therapy i do it
a little bit of change but nothing
really happens then my hope sinks
it's like um i don't know what the
expression is uh
a god that dies every single time this
happens is how i explain it like i had
this belief in something and then it got
burst it's very painful
and so you know people are commonly
suggesting new forms of therapy my hope
rises
and i have to be able to control that
and know that there is no quick fix on
this
the actress sharon stone had a stroke
very similar to mine
at an age at a comparable age
and i actually was going to try and
contact her it sounded like we had very
similar experiences
she wrote that it took her seven years
whoa
to get back
to a normal kind of life
i've done three years so far
so i have to tell myself
that there are no quick fixes and she
herself did every form of therapy
imaginable and believe me
people are well-meaning
and they come they say robert you gotta
try this you gotta try that i've gone to
the point where like please don't tell
me that anymore you know
i don't believe in quick fixes i have to
do this day by day by day i have to
retrain my body
you know so
i'm trying a new form of therapy right
now
it didn't instantly give me results
um it's something very interesting it's
based on feldenkrais
fascinating new way what is feldenkrais
it's a whole different way of looking at
your body and i find it fascinating it's
just not
hyper designed for a stroke victim
but i think somebody will someday it's
based on this idea that the body is a
whole unit
right
so you can't isolate the parts the body
works as a whole it's in a complete
organic hole
so if you have back pain it doesn't stem
from your back it stems from your pelvis
it stems from your hamstrings it stems
from how you move your legs stems from
your neck the whole body
and we have built in tensions all over
our body
we use muscles that we don't need to use
right
so every time you're about to lift
something or do something arduous or
even psychologically do something
arduous the chest muscles tense up as if
that will help you somehow get over what
you're doing
but you don't need the chest muscles
they're not you design for that you're
using muscles that you don't need
they're expending energy if only the
muscles that were necessary to do the
job were firing
everything would work so much better
so the felt in christ this is
called the anat by neil method she was a
student of elton christ
is
there's an ideal of the body that i can
sense when i do the lessons where you're
on a whole other level you're like
only using the muscles that are
necessary you're moving with this kind
of grace and elegance and efficiency
that wasn't existing before all the bad
habits with our necks our shoulders
and and the psychological stuff that
they put you through it's very powerful
it's just not
geared specifically for a stroke victim
then i'm doing another form of therapy
tom you have no idea how
boring
this physical therapy is right so when
i'm used to exercises that's kind of fun
i even lifting weights can be fun
because you see your muscles building
right you feel your heart pounding
swimming running it's all kind of fun
this is like little micro movements with
your knee with your leg it's so boring
so i have to like put music on i have to
watch the ball game i have to do
something to distract myself
so i mean i'm going through all the the
weeds here of of my process but that's
well so what i find interesting about it
is just inevitably
all of us are going to go through
something or have gone through something
and how we deal with that crisis is so
telling and the fact that you've
you know we were talking before we
started rolling that typing is hard and
so here you have an author and you've
taken away one of the ways by which they
get that out and
as somebody who's thought so i'm a late
bloomer and
i have this real sense of wanting to
make the most of the time that i have
late blooming meaning when how how late
were you blooming
the the skills stack right so i
feel like i'm getting better but like
when i think about
things that i'm i'm 45 now and i'm only
just now getting confident in certain
abilities
thank you what's your secret
diet
exercise sleep meditation that really
there's nothing magical i do not come
from great genes i'm very sad to report
um
so
when i think about the things that are
just now beginning to click for me and
i'm like oh my god like i see even
people on my own team that are 10 years
15 years ahead of where i was
it's very easy to be jealous that oh my
god you have this insight you know so
many years before i did and you know how
much more time will you be able to make
use of but very quickly you realize it's
not a fruitful way to approach it and so
i
this was years ago now maybe five years
ago i did this thing to celebrate i
forget how many subscribers we had on
facebook or youtube or something and i
went live for 24 hours so i was on
camera for 24 hours without all i the
only breaks i took were to pee
and
then three days later i was in england
and i gave a speech and um i didn't have
a microphone and so for nine hours i was
essentially yelling um to this large
crowd
and then i woke up and my voice was
weird
and it didn't go away didn't go away and
i felt like i had a lump in my throat
and then like when i would turn my head
i could feel something click and i was
like
so then of course i'm like is this
cancer like what is this and you start
thinking what would happen if i lost my
voice
as a leader even just in business forget
being on camera
my ability to persuade to um galvanize a
team to get people excited and focused i
have learned to do it all with my voice
and so i started thinking what would
happen if i lost my voice and it's like
okay like i would definitely have to
mourn i would have to go through a
period where it's like i'm just gonna
feel badly for myself for a while
but then it's like you you make use of
what you have but it really made me take
stock of
i had taken my ability to speak for
granted for at the time whatever 39 40
years
and
now i don't and now i'm very thoughtful
and so
getting the kind of insights of the
struggle that you're having
it's very useful
yeah i mean it's all unfortunately it's
inevitable for everyone you may not you
may not go through a stroke but you're
going to deal with some kind of
adversity
where the physical
things that you took for granted are
taken away from you that just happens as
the nature of life and it can occur at
any age
um
so these are skills that you have to
develop and you but the main thing i try
and tell people is
i don't know how much how how
powerfully i can i can implant this in
your brain
but do not take for granted what you
have right now
because i can tell you i did
i thought i'd be swimming the rest of my
life it was my life it meant so much to
me
do not take for granted what you have
now when you're doing these activities
feel insane amounts of gratitude that
you have a body that can perform these
things because it could be taken away
from you tomorrow right so that's the
number one thing i want to tell people
it's not to get anxious and paranoid and
fearful about the future that's not
going to help you at all you need to
have a joyful life a happy life
so but look at what you have right now
and look at the marvels the things you
don't realize as i said what your hands
and legs and brain can do it's
absolutely miraculous and awesome so
just look at it that way and then if
these things happen
we are creatures that are able to
accommodate ourselves to things we can
be very good at that right you know we
find compensations for it i mean the
other thing
you know being 45 i was
even late more a later bloomer than you
i think i mean i didn't start writing
the 48 laws until i was about 36 37 you
were probably you were doing things well
before that i remember from a business
standpoint yeah yeah it your story of
late blooming is really extraordinary
like it's amazing
well yeah i mean um so
you know until i was 36 i was pretty
lost i wasn't like starting a great
business like quest and all these other
things i was
a struggling
depressed penniless screenwriter in
santa monica in a one-bedroom apartment
you know in this kind of run-down
apartment building
right and then suddenly my life changed
so i'm as late a bloomer as you can get
but
there's a reason why you bloom late if
you bloom at all
which is it comes at the moment that
you're ready for it right
so
people who are 32 33 that you might be
envious of
they're not ready to create what you're
able to create now with all of your
experience and all the things you've
learned with all the businesses you've
started all your entrepreneurial skills
all the people you've interviewed you
have that rich landscape of a brain that
we're talking about that 32 year old
they may have
more ex you know some more experiences
than you had but they have nowhere near
the ability to to exploit it like you
have it now you know so yeah i like to
run the brain in a vat experiment
and that i find it really useful and
every time i explain to this this to
people i never see this sort of spark in
their eye that i want to see but for me
this has been
really liberating which any time i find
myself thinking you know woe is me or
whatever i say hold on
imagine for a second that all of this is
just the frame of reference that you
need literally you came into existence
in this moment you're a brain in a vat
somewhere and all the
trauma
sadnesses um failings all of that
is the context to your point about
emotions is the emotional context
becomes necessary for you to make
decisions and move forward so rather
than lament it just like make sure that
you're making decisions that propel you
forward and even though i don't believe
that i think my life was lived and it is
exactly what i think it is and the
traumas and all of that are all real and
they're just a part of me but there's
something about running that thought
experiment that allows me to
recontextualize the purpose of
you know whether it's lamenting being a
late bloomer or my big lament which you
talk about in the book
you know just not being as smart as i
want to be like when i see people that
can really process data quickly oh i get
so jealous to this day that everybody
has their thing that's my thing
and uh
but realizing that with if you look at
it from just a slightly different angle
all of a sudden it's like all right i'm
good
you process data very quickly
you think that because you're talking to
me about subjects that i've already
thought about if you were talking to me
about a subject that's totally new
uh it it certainly startles me every
time how long it takes me to really like
i would never be a debater on national
television i would just tell you that
so that does not speak so much
specialized skill that i wish i had oh
really definitely yeah i mean i've been
around i've been at social gatherings
for the uh
uh this one person i know who has these
meetings with the smartest people around
and these these whipper snappers who are
25 26 and they're doing what you're
doing there they've got all this
information all the snappy stuff all
these anecdotes
damn where's that coming from you know
i'm just not like that animal right i'm
slow
i'm deliberate i need to read about i
need to process things and i go
slowness is a good thing
right they may be a whipper snapper but
they may be not being able to like go
into depth about anything they're on the
surfaces they're kind of regurgitating
ideas and beliefs that are kind of on
the surface that they're good at at
fooling people but they're not going
into the depths
people who go into the depths are slow
are deliberate
take time to think who are more
thoughtful you know and are more patient
so i wouldn't want to be that fast
you know that high speed processor that
they have because i don't think that's
where great things come from
it's interesting that's a very good way
to think about it the harder way to
think about it though is to say what if
they really are just better than me and
now facing that so the one that i always
pose to people is i want you to imagine
that someone you really respect doesn't
respect you that's hard now if you can
deal with that like if i can stare
nakedly at my own inadequacies compare
myself to somebody who just objectively
is better at something that i want to be
good at so not not even discounting like
sure there might be trade-offs but can i
look nakedly at somebody who is truly
better than me at something that i want
to be great at
and still find joy and fulfillment in my
life that to me is like that's the
question and so i've tried to
get myself to a place you talked earlier
i thought this is so brilliant that your
ego gets knocked down but you have these
mechanisms like a thermostat to reset
your sense of self
that to me is the juice you have to get
good at that and so
i
used to
really get an emotional twist over this
stuff but i have learned some very
useful techniques to keep my emotional
equilibrium so i can say that i'm
envious of people that have that without
diminishing my sense of self or you know
losing time and energy to worrying about
it anymore i used to i don't want to
paint that this was easy
but that to me is is the trick okay but
i still think your process of that
they're so much better than me
is a bit of an illusion or the reason
for being envious okay so you combat
your envy all right but i'm trying to
tell you i don't think there is a reason
for your envy in the first place
so
people are they're not as brilliant as
you think they are
right people are good at faking things
generally
right and then maybe they're not as
happy as they seem to be maybe their
life you're just seeing them on
television or with their snappy answers
but they're covering up everything else
that's going on underneath right you're
not seeing the full picture there right
so there's generally your envy is always
kind of exaggerated because you're
beginning from a place of insecurity
you're beginning from a place
of inferiority where you're primed to
feel envious of people like that so it's
almost starting with you you're almost
projecting onto them their superior
qualities
you know and i find myself doing that
yes there are people who are better than
me i certainly know that there's a
writer i deeply admire who passed away
recently he's much more of an academic
and intellectual
his name is roberto colosso he was an
italian writer wrote a lot about ancient
greece
that guy is far more brilliant than i am
he's amazing what he wrote about i'm in
awe of it and i really mourned his
passing
but i think it's important to feel
for that not envy but just
disinterested in admiration for people
who are superior to you and to recognize
it i know there are plenty of writers
and thinkers who are superior to me and
if they are genuinely that way they're
not bullshitting
all my hats off to them we need people
like that it it it
reaffirms my faith in humanity when i
see someone that i think is vastly
superior or great at what they do i wish
i could be like them
okay there are other humans on this
world it's not as bad as we think it is
who are absolutely brilliant and you
know i feel that way about great
scientists as well i'm kind of a a
scientist monkey in a way
so um it's a monkey oh sorry no i love
it you're teaching me it's a french word
monkey means
a failed you know i wanted to be a
wannabe
i'm a scientist wannabe sort of thing i
missed the boat it literally means
missed
um
so you know i deeply admire it
and um
and if i detect creativity and people in
their work i'm in awe of it you know and
there are people who can do creativity
that i can't even begin to imagine
that's where i feel aw and genuine
admiration
i never feel envy believe me i feel envy
all the time but not for people who are
incredibly creative
yeah it's interesting that's a great
frame i love
that i like you when i meet somebody
that blows me away i love it like i'm
stoked i'd be lying if i said that i
didn't want it also for myself but i'm
stoked that it exists in the world um
yeah that is
very exciting when you see what humans
are capable of and then you take us as a
collective it's really interesting so i
just i was interviewed by a guy named
brian keating yesterday who wrote a book
about um i think it's called into the
impossible uh but he talks or no sorry
his book is about um
beyond like getting rid of the nobel
prize i forget the exact title brian
forgive me um but
he was talking about how the nobel prize
has like caused some of the greatest
scientists on planet earth to commit
suicide and like all this crazy [__] i
was like what and he was like oh yeah
you you um get these guys are nominated
for a nobel prize but because they never
win it becomes so devastating that they
can't live with it and i'm like you're
nominated for a nobel prize something
that like
0.000 of humanity will ever you know
achieve
uh
but he was like yeah it's like a really
a devastating thing for people and
he he of course remembered all the
people that had won and i get you have
to sign this book when you win and so in
the book you see like um albert einstein
and all these other people and he said
you know feinman was like well i'm never
going to be an einstein einstein was
like i'm never going to be a newton
newton was like i'm never going to be a
galileo or whatever and it was like
you know that all of these people
were just like we look at them like oh
my god like that would be insane to hit
that level and each and every one of
them had someone that they were like
well but i'll never be that person so
fascinating well that's that's that's
human nature in a nutshell because i
talk about that in the laws of human
nature in the chapter about envy
that our brains operate by comparison
that's how it operates on the most basic
level two a piece of information
comes through our senses and our brain
immediately processes it by comparing it
to previous things that we that we've
experienced so the brain only operates
by comparing
so when you create a social animal that
has a brain that operates that way and
is conscious obviously they're going to
be primed to continually compare
themselves to other people right so
albert einstein was comparing himself to
niels bohr to other people who he had
insecurities as well people who were
into quantum mechanics and making these
great discoveries he felt that kind of
little wound of envy as well and it's
been written about so yeah it's
impossible to get over the most powerful
person in the world is going to feel
that envy and in fact the higher up you
go
the more insecure you might tend to
become you know and you wonder do i
still have it
i'm getting older a lot of scientists
reach their prime when they're 30 35
now they're 45 and they're 50 and that
nobel prize slipped through their hands
even though they're absolutely brilliant
so they're going to be feeling envy
envy is deeply deeply human and nobody
wants to talk about it it's the most
common human emotion and it's the least
common uh topic that we ever discussed
except in your books where you go into
it beautifully which i love and that's
part of the fun of your books is it's
all the things that nobody wants to talk
about and talked about well and
articulately with stories and
evidence i mean it's really fascinating
and for anybody that wants to you know
do what we were talking about earlier
and develop that self-awareness just
hearing about it talked about so
clearly is
very helpful
oh well thank you very helpful dude i
love your work i uh it has been a joy to
have you on the show as many times as i
have i cannot wait for the next one yeah
this is what my fourth time you three or
four yeah and hopefully there will be
five six that's incredible yeah yeah i
love having you on the show
[Music]
thank you for being here yeah
where can people follow along as you
write the next one well we have the the
new book out daily laws which came out
last week which is amazing okay i did
the audio version i highly recommend it
you you make multiple appearances i did
yeah how do i sound fantastic okay now
secretly i wish you'd read the whole
book was there a reason that you didn't
how's the other person great but it's
wonderful but when i mean i want robert
greene
well um it's it's a bit stressful um i i
love it i would have done the whole book
but just to do the parts that i did took
about three hours
and it's about
five percent of the book
so you know you do the math it would
have taken like two solid days no doubt
and um i'm not a trained actor
i'm gonna do this sublime book that
would be i'll be narrating that because
i do enjoy it it's kind of fun
because i wrote it i think i kind of
give it an extra flavor
so yeah
um
so you can i have a new website it's at
robertgreenofficial.com i hope i have
that right i'm robert green official
your socials are at robert green
official yes and there you will find
instagram i have tick tock believe it or
not my man
yeah that's good that's good this new
generation needs to know okay so i've
ticked if i talk instagram
facebook uh twitter
and then a website where you can get
links to all of my books and some of my
ancient blog posts and things like in
interviews it's in my youtube channel
incredible
well as always thank you for being here
it was wonderful thank you can't wait to
read
my inner discussions with you thank you
guys
trust me when i say you don't want to
miss a single word that this man says so
be sure to check it out and speaking of
things you don't want to miss if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe and
until next time my friends be legendary
take care peace
you